---
layout: course-page
title: "Assignment 1"
permalink: /module1/assignment
description: "Prototyping Connected Product - Assignment 1"
assignment-id: 1
assignment-of: id5415-1
introduction: In this assignment, you will set up a Raspberry Pi as a connected home hub to control connected light bulbs. We will walk you through the different 
prog_environment: VS Code, Raspberry Pi
design: 
code_management: Git, GitHub
computational_concepts: 
---


---

* Do not remove this line (it will not be displayed)
{:toc}

---


# Step 1: Light Bulb

In this step you will start interacting with a connected light bulb from TP-Link and explore its functionalities.

* Kasa app
* Control of the light
* Alternative architectures (direct/hub/cloud)

# Step 2: Home Hub

In this step you will use a Raspberry Pi to setup a home hub. This hub will run a program to control the connected light bulb.

## Task 2.1: Setting up

* Connect to Bucket and create a Raspberry Pi Thing, it triggers the generation of a custom image
* Run the Raspberry Pi
* Explore the Raspberry Pi, UNIX environment

## Task 2.2: Controlling the Light Bulb

* Connected-Home Web server running on the Pi 
* Add light bulb and control it from the hub

# Step 3: Data

In this step you will start exploring two types of data: the logs generated by the hub to understand what is happening and the sensor data generated by the connected devices.

## Task 3.1: Logs

It is common for software to generate logs, so that maintainers can monitor it and look for information when things go wrong.

* Explore JSON logs from connected-home: format, information, role

## Task 3.2: Cloud/Grafana

By default, Connected-Home send all data to your data bucket in the cloud.

* Connect to Grafana, a timeseries visualisation tool
* Explore the data generated by the hub and the light bulb

# Step 4: Development Environment

Now that you have a working prototype of connected lighting system, let's see what's under the hood. In this last step you will setup your development environment to start modifying the behaviour of the lighting system.

## Task 3.1: Git and GitHub


## Task 3.1: Visual Studio Code

* Install VS Code
* Retrieve code from the 

## Task 3.3: Python

# Project

lighting system: comfort, energy, communication, atmosphere, fitting activities

* event/data driven
* connectivity?
* data processing


Example:



