---
layout: course-page
title: "Reverse Engineering"
permalink: /module1/labxp
description: "Prototyping Connected Products - Lab Experiment 1"
labxp-of: id5415-1
introduction: Lab experiment is the term we use in this course for making using of the prototype through test and analysis. In this Lab Experiment, we will explore the  data that is automatically generated from your Raspberry Pi. We will have a first taste of data exploration and use these insights to infer how the system works.
technique: Data Exploration, Reverse Engineering
metrics:
report: System Architecture, System Data Visualisation
---


---

* Do not remove this line (it will not be displayed)
{:toc}

---

# Step 1: Team work

From the matchmaking event of the first coaching session, you should now be part of a team. Throughout the course you will use GitHub as a platform to share your assignment code with the team and report on lab experiments.

**Note:** Keep in mind that during the coaching sessions you will receive feedback only based on what you share on this repository.


## Task 1: GitHub invitation

Use the GitHub invitation link shared by the course coordinator to create your repository. You will be prompt for the name of your team. Make sure you enter the same name as your teammates.

TODO little tour of the GitHub interface and repository
* doc folder
* src folder
* ChangeLog file

## Task 2: Markdown

TODO
* to edit the README.md,
* write a contributor section with names and 1-sentence bio of each teammate
* add a team picture (for the sake of knowing how to use markdown)

**What did we achieved?**

* we have a GitHub repository, ready to report a lab experiment

# Step 1: Identifying the IoT's Technology Stack

In this step you will start exploring two types of data: the logs generated by the hub to understand what is happening and the sensor data generated by the connected devices.

In the self-study material we explored the IoT's technology stack.

**Report** On GitHub, in the doc folder, create a file architecture.md. Describe this IoT stack with text and diagrams.

## Step 2: Logs

It is common for software to generate logs, so that the maintainers can monitor it and look for information when things go wrong.


TODO log exploration


**Report** On GitHub, in the doc folder, create a log.md file to explain the system currently log and what it tells you about how the system works.

### Task 2: Downloading Logs

It is often convenient to have the ability to explore log files on your laptop.

On your computer

```bash
scp
```

## Step 3: Cloud/Grafana

By default, Connected-Home send all data to your data bucket in the cloud.

* Connect to Grafana, a timeseries visualisation tool
* Explore the data generated by the hub and the light bulb

**Report** On GitHub, in the doc folder, create a file prototype_dashboard.md. Describe your prototype dashboard with text and screenshots. What can we see and what these metrics means?